---
layout: post
title:  "GSoC 2019 | Week 1, 2"
date:   2019-06-10
---

During the first week of GSoC coding period, I worked on adding indexing support for arbitrary dimensional matrices. Till now, NMatrix only supported 2-dimensional matrices and the code assumed the NMatrix object to be of 2 dimensions. I first needed to modify code to store no. of dimensions and then write indexing conversions to map input comma separated indexes to the index of corresponding element in the flat list of elements stored at back-end. This was done pretty easily with the help of strides which were the prefixes for each comma separated index value in the equation to calculate required index in flat list. Once the indexing part was done and working, I wrote the setters and getters for matrix elements. I wrote some tests for indexing(setting and getting).

```
void get_stride(nmatrix* nmat, size_t* stride){
  size_t val = 1;
  for(int i = (nmat->ndims)-1; i >= 0; --i){ //using int here instead of size_t
    stride[i] = val;                         //because size_t does not support
    val *= nmat->shape[i];                    //decrement operator
  }
} 
```

```
size_t get_index(nmatrix* nmat, VALUE* indices){
  size_t index = 0;
  size_t* stride = (size_t*)calloc(nmat->ndims, sizeof(size_t));
  get_stride(nmat, stride);
  for(size_t i = 0; i < nmat->ndims; ++i){

    if((size_t)FIX2LONG(indices[i]) >= nmat->shape[i] ||
          (int)FIX2LONG(indices[i]) < 0) {  //index out of bounds
      rb_raise(rb_eIndexError, "IndexError: index is out of bounds.");
    }

    index += ((size_t)FIX2LONG(indices[i]) * stride[i]);
  }
  return index;
}
```

The second week of GSoC was spent in implementing iterators for NMatrix. `NMatrix#each` was easy to implement as it was simply yielding each element from the flat list of elements. It seemed to me that other iterators would also be as easy to implement but it wasn't so as it took quite a lot of time to implement iterators with indexes. Iterators with indexes yield both the current element and the associated comma separated indexes with it. For increment of comma separated indexes after each iteration, I wrote function `increment_index` which would increment current values to next one.

```
void increment_state(VALUE* state_array, VALUE* shape_array, size_t ndims) {

  for (size_t index = ndims; index > 0; index--) {
    int curr_dim_index = (int)NUM2INT(state_array[index]);
    int curr_dim_length = (int)NUM2INT(shape_array[index - 1]);

    if (curr_dim_index + 1 == curr_dim_length) {
      curr_dim_index = 0;
      state_array[index] = INT2NUM(curr_dim_index);
    } else {
      curr_dim_index++;
      state_array[index] = INT2NUM(curr_dim_index);
      break;
    }

  }
}
```

List of iterators implemented:

+	`NMatrix#each`
+	`NMatrix#each_with_indices`
+	`NMatrix#each_row`
+	`NMatrix#each_column`

Iterators yet to be implemented:

+	`NMatrix#each_layer`
+	`NMatrix#each_rank`
+	`NMatrix#each_stored_with_indices`
+	`NMatrix#each_ordered_stored_with_indices`
+	`NMatrix#map_stored`

Initially, I wrote `each_row` and `each_column` such that they would only work for 2-dimensional matrices. For `each_row`, I would take NMatrix object and for each of the iteration, would calculate the index of each of it's element in the flat list in background then store them in an array and yield this array wrapped as ruby array. For `each_column`, the methodolgy was same with just traversing each column and yield array having elements of each column. 

Later, I would expand these methods to work for N-dimensional matrices too. This would require implementing a generic method `NMatrix#rank` which would take in the index of dimension along which traversal is done and index of the required part along that dimension as it's argument. To traverse along each row, this would be used as `rank(0, idx)`, where 0 denotes that we want part along the first dimesion (i.e. row) and idx is row to be returned like `rank(0, 0)` would return the first row, `rank(0, 1)` would return the second row and so on. To traverse along each column, this would be used as `rank(1, idx)`. So, in order to traverse along kth dimension, use `rank(k, idx)` and yield the returned object for each of the iteration starting from `rank(k, 0)` and incrementing k after each iteration. `NMatrix#each_layer` would also work the same way with the use of `rank(2, idx)`. This would be simplified by creating generic methods `NMatrix#rank` and `NMatrix#each_rank` and using these inside `NMatrix#row`, `NMatrix#each_row`, `NMatrix#column`, `NMatrix#each_column`, `NMatrix#layer` and `NMatrxi#each_layer`.

`NMatrix#rank` would internally work by doing slicing of the given NMatrix object with only one index (idx in the examples above) along the given dimension and full ranges along all other dimensions. In other words, for a matrix `nm` having 4 dimenisons `nm.rank(0, 3)` would return a slice `nm[3, :, :, :]` which would be a matrix having 3 dimensions. So, next step is to implement slicing is quite a task in it's own. As indexing takes in comma separated indexes and returns a value on that location, slicing takes in comma separated ranges and return the collection of elements in the given range and wraps this collection in an NMatrix object with corresponding shape and other NMatrix metadata. The dimensions of returned slice is determined by the number of ranges having length greater than one and length of each dimension would be determined by the length of each range given or if whole range is taken, then length of that dimension in the given matrix. For example, for a matrix `nm[4, 4, 4, 4, 4]`, `nm[0:2, :, 2, :, :]` would return a slice of shape `[3, 4, 4, 4]`.

For coming weeks, I'll complete the above remaining iterators and start work on slicing and broadcasting. Feel free to share your thoughts in the comments section. Thanks for reading.
